
CHAPTER III 


SIGN-SITUATIONS 

Studiuln linguarum m universis, in ipsis primor- 
diis tnste est et ingratum; sed primis difficcltatibus 
labore improbo et ardore nobili pemiptis, postea 
cumulatissime beamur — Valcknaer 

Meaning, that pivotal term of every theory of langu 
age, cannot be treated without a satisfactory theory of 
signs. With some of its senses (in which ‘ my meaning’ 
= ‘ what I am thinking of’) the question to be answered 
IS, in brief, What happens when we judge, or believe, 
or think of something: of what kind of entities does 
the something consist: and how is it related to the 
mental event which is our judging, our believing, our 
thinking?” The traditional approach to this question 
has been through introspection and through the logica' 
analysis of Judgment, with the result that all the many 
answers which have been given from this angle will be 
found, in contrast to that which is outlined below, to 
be variants of one opinion. They agree, that is, in 
holding that, when we think of anything, we have to it 
(or sometimes to something else) a relation of a quite 
unique kind In other words thinking is regarded as 
an unparalleled happening. Thus the problems of 
symbolization and reference come to be discussed in 
isolation as though there were no allied fields of 
inquiry. 

This assumption of the uniqueness of the relation 
between the mind and its objects is the central tenet 
in views which otherwise have no point of agreement. 
Thus it is plausibly held by some that when we are 
believing (say) that we are alive, we are in a direct 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


49 


relation of a unique kind to an entity which is neither 
in time nor in space, to be called the proposition ‘ that 
we are alive.’ Others pretend that there is nothing of 
this sort, but that instead we are then related by a 
multiple relation, again of an unique kind, with a 
variety of entities—among which are (perhaps) we 
ourselves and certainly something to be called a ‘ con 
cept’ (or ‘universal’ or ‘property’), namely aliveness 
or behig alive. On both views the uniqueness in kind 
of the relation between a thought as a mental event 
and the things, whatever they may be, which the thought 
is ‘ of,’ is too obvious to be questioned. 

As a representative of the realist school which 
claims to have assimilated the modern scientific 
outlook, we may cite Keynes, who adopted the view 
that philosophically we must start from various classes 
of things with which we have direct acquaintance. 
“The most important classes of things with which 
we have direct acquaintance are our own sensations, 
which we may be said to expenencef the ideas and 
meanings, about which we have thoughts and which 
we may be said to understand, and facts or character 
istics or relations of sense data or meanings, which 
we may be said to perceive. . . . The objects of 
knowledge ^pd belief—as opposed to the objects of 
direct acquaintance which I term sensations, meanings, 
and perceptions —1 shall term propositions." As an 
example of direct knowledge we are told that from 
acquaintance with a sensation of yellow “ I can pass 
directly to a knowledge of the proposition ‘ I have a 
sensation of yellow.’”^ Lest it should be supposed 
that this odd, but very prevalent, doctrine is peculiar 
to a school, we may refer to the justification of das 
TJrteil, “spaceless, timeless and impersonal,” the 
specific object of logical inquiry, elaborated by Lipps ; ’ 

1 A Treatise on Probability (1921), pp 12-13 

* Psychologische Untersuchungen, Vol. II, section i. " Zur ' Psy- 
chologie ' und ‘ Fbilosophie/ " pp 4-10 



THE MEANING OF MEANING 


50 

to the similar doctrine which vitiates so much of 
Husserl’s analysis of language;^ and to the still 
more extraordinary phantasies of van Ginneken, a 
subtle linguistic psychologist who, influenced doubt 
less by Meinong as well as by Theology, advances 
the same view as a theory of ‘ adhesion.’ No account 
of thinking in terms of verbal images and representa 
tions of things IS, according to this author, suiScient. 
“We find ourselves confronted by a new force: some 
thing non-sensible, transcendental ... by means of 
which we understand and know in a new manner, and 
a more perfect one than we could through our animal 
nature. We . . . adhere to the present reality, to 
that which is really and actually there . . . and also to 
the possible, the essence.”^ It is plain that on any such 
view a scientific account of thinking is ruled out from 
the very beginning. 

“What happens when we think?” is a question 
which should be of interest to every thinker. The 
triteness of the answer “When we think, we think,” 
offered by such views may help to explain the small 
ness of the interest which is shown. In the following 
pages an attempt is made to outline an account of 
thinking in purely causal terms, without any introduc 
tion of unique relations invented ad hoc. It is with this 
end in view, the provision of a natural as opposed to 
an artificial theory of thinking, that we begin with the 
consideration of signs. 

Throughout almost all our life we are treating things 
as signs. All experience, using the word m the widest 
possible sense, is either enjoyed or interpreted {i.e., 
treated as a sign) or both, and very little of it escapes 
some degree of interpretation. An account of the 
process of Interpretation is thus the key to the under 
standing of the Sign-situation, and therefore the be- 

1 See Appendix D, where Mr Russell’s similar (1903) view will 
alsp be found 

* Principles de Ltngutsltque Psychologique, pp 52, 55, 68-9 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


51 


ginning of wisdom. It is astonishing that although 
the need for such an account has long been a 
commonplace in psychology, those concerned with 
the criticism and organization of our knowledge have 
with few exceptions entirely ignored the consequences 
of its neglect. 

Attempts to provide this account have been given 
in many dilferent vocabularies. The doctrines of the 
associationists,^ of apperception,* of suggestion,* have 
led up to restatements in terms of process rather than 
of content: ‘instinctive sequences'* taking the place 
of ‘ mental chemistry,’ with advantage but without 
essential change in the views maintained. The most 
recent form in which the account appears is that 
adopted by Semon, the novelty of whose vocabulary 
seems to have attracted attention once more to con 
siderations which were no doubt too familiar to be 
thought of any importance. 

These otherwise valuable methods of approach tend 
to separate the treatment of fundamental laws of mental 
process from that of sign-interpretation, which is un 
fortunate for psychology. They have led not only to 
the discussion in isolation of problems essentially the 
same, but also to a failure to realize the extent of the 
ground already covered by earlier thinkers. 

Since the formulation has always been given in 
causal terms, it will be convenient to use that termin- 
ology. Its use is indeed almost unavoidable in the 
interests of intelligibility, and need not be misleading 
if the correct expansion is remembered. Thus in this 
preliminary account we are merely using causal language 
as an expository convenience for the sake of its brevity 
and Its verbs. The fuller statement which follows 
avoids all mention of causes, effects, and dependence, 

1 D. Hartley, Observations on Man, Prop X 

* G C Lange, Apperception, Part I, §§ i, 2. 

* I Miller, The Psychology of Thinking, p. 154 

* C Lloyd Morgan, Instinct and Experience, p 194 



52 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

and deals merely with observable correlations or con 
textual uniformities among events. 

The effects upon the organism due to any sign, 
which may be any stimulus from without, or any process 
taking place within, depend upon the past history of 
the organism, both generally and in a more precise 
fashion. In a sense, no doubt, the whole past history 
is relevant: but there will be some among the past 
events in that history which more directly determine 
the nature of the present agitation than others. Thus 
when we strike a match, the movements we make and 
the sound of the scrape are present stimuli. But the 
excitation which results is different from what it would 
be had we never struck matches before. Past strikings 
have left, in our organization, engrams,^ residual traces, 
which help to determine what the mental process will be. 
For instance, this mental process is among other things 
an awareness that we are striking a match. Apart from 
the effects of similar previous situations we should have 
no such awareness. Suppose further that the aware 
ness is accompanied by an expectation of a flame. 
This expectation again will be due to the effects of 
situations in which the striking of a match has been 
followed by a flame. The expectation is the excitation 
of part of an engram complex, which is called up by 
a stimulus (the scrape) similar to a part only of the 
original stimulus-situation. 

A further example will serve to make this clearer. 
The most celebrated of all caterpillars, whose history 
is in part recorded in the late Professor Lloyd Morgan’s 
Habit and Instinct, p. 41, was striped yellow and black and 
was seized by one of the professor’s chickens. Being 
offensive in taste to the chicken he was rejected. Thence 
forth the chicken refrained from seizing similar cater 
pillars. Why? Because the sight of such a cater- 

I Semon's terminology Die Mneme, particularly Part II (English 
translation, p 138 S.) For a critique of Semon's theory, see op at, 
Pnnaples of Literary Cntiasm, Chapter XIV , and op at, The Meaning 
of Psychology, Chapter IV 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


53 


pillar, a part that is of the whole sight-seize-taste 
context of the original experience, now excites the 
chicken in a way sufficiently^ like that in which the 
whole context did, for the seizing at least not to occur, 
whether the tasting (in images) does or not. 

This simple case is typical of all interpretation, the 
peculiarity of interpretation being that when a context 
has affected us in the past the recurrence of merely a 
part of the context will cause us to react in the way 
in which we reacted before.* A sign is always a 
stimulus similar to some part of an original stimulus 
and sufficient to call up the engram * formed by that 
stimulus. 

An engram is the residual trace of an adaptation * 
made by the organism to a stimulus. The mental 
process* due to the calling up of an engram is a 
similar adaptation: so far as it is cognitive, what it is 
adapted to is its referent, and is what the sign which 
excites it stands for or signifies. 

The term ‘adapted,’ though convenient, requires 
expansion if this account is to be made clear—and to 
this expansion the remainder of the present chapter 
is devoted. Returning to our instance, we will sup 
pose that the match ignites and that we have been 
expecting a flame. In this case the flame is what we 

^ The degree of likeness necessary is a matter of dispute Yellow 
and black thus becomes a sign for offensiveness in taste 

* To use the terminology of the Gestalt school, when a ‘ gestalt ’ 
or ' configuration ' has been formed, a system that has been disturbed 
will tend towards the ' end-state ' determined by former occurrences 
This view and terminology are discussed m cit , The Meaning 
of Psychology, pp io8-u, and 114-15 where a paragraph will be 
found m which six different phrases could all be replaced by the word 
gestalt, if desired (though the paragraph seems clearer as it is) 

’ If the reader is doubtful about engrams he may read " to call 
up an excitation similar to that caused by the original stimulus " 

* This is not necessarily a right or appropriate adaptation We are 
here only considering adaptation so far as it is cogmtive, and may 
disregard the affective-volitional character of the process 

^ The account here given may be read as neutral in regard to psycho- 
neural parallelism, interaction, and double aspect hypotheses, since 
the problem of the relation of mind and body is—m so far as it is not 
itself a phantom problem — a later one Cf Chapter IV , p 81, and 
op ctl, The Meaning of Psychology, Chapter II. 



54 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

are adapted to. More fully, the mental process which 
is the expectation is similar to processes which have 
been caused by flames in the past, and further it is 
‘directed to’ the future. If we can discover what this 
‘ directed to ’ stands for we shall have filled in the chief 
part of our account of interpretation. 

Besides being ‘directed to’ the future our expecta 
tion is also ‘ directed to ’ flame. But here ‘ directed to ’ 
stands for nothing more than ‘ similar to what has been 
caused by. ’ A thought is directed to flame when it is similar 
in certain respects to thoughts which have been caused 
by flame. As has been pointed out above, we must not 
allow the defects of causal language either to mislead us 
here or alternatively to make us abandon the method of 
approach so indicated. We shall find, if we improve 
this language, both that this kind of substitute for 
‘directed to’ loses its strangeness, and also that the 
same kind of substitution will meet the case of ‘direc 
tion to the future ’ and will in fact explain the ‘ direction ’ 
or reference of thinking processes in general. 

The unpurified notion of cause is especially mis 
leading in this connection since it has led even the 
hardiest thinkers* to shrink from the identification of 

^ Exceptions such as Mr F B Holt and Mr Russell, who have 
independently adopted causal theories of reference, have not succeeded 
in giving precision to this view Ihe former, who holds (TAe Freudian 
Wish, p i68) that in behaviour there is “ a genuine objective reference 
to the environment,” yet continues—“ Even when one is conscious 
of things that are not there, as in hallucination, one’s body is adjusted 
to them as if they were there,” or again (p 202), " Why does a boy go 
fishing ’ &cause the behaviour of the growing organism is so 

far integrated as to respond specifically to such an environmental object 
as fish in the pond . The lioy’s thought (content) is the fish ” It 
will be seen that the contextual theory of reference outlined in the 
present chapter provides an account of specific response which applies, 
as Mr Holt's does not, to erroneous and to truly adapted behaviour 
alike Mr Russell, on the other hand, who, like Mr Holt, has now 
abandoned the theory of direct knowledge relations between minds 
and things, obscures the formulation of the cansal acconnt in his Analysts 
of Mind by introducing considerations which arise from a quite incom 
patible treatment ” It is a very singular thing,” he says (p 235), 
“ that meaning which is single should generate objective reference, 
which IS dual, namely, true and false ” When we come to the analysis 
of complex references we shall see how this anomaly disappears The 
supposed distinction between ‘ meaning ' in this sense and objective 
reference is one merely of degree of complexity accentuated by symbolic 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


55 


‘ thinking of’ with ‘ being caused by.’ The suggestion 
that to say ‘I am thinking of A’ is the same thing as 
to say ‘My thought is being caused by A,’ will shock 
every right-minded person ; and yet when for ‘ caused ’ 
we substitute an expanded account, this strange sugges 
tion will be found to be the solution. 

A Cause indeed, in the sense of a something which 
forces another something called an effect to occur, is 
so obvious a phantom that it has been rejected even 
by metaphysicians. The current scientific account, on 
the other hand, which reduces causation to correlation, 
is awkward for purposes of exposition, since in the 
absence of a ‘ conj'ugatmg ’ vocabulary constant peri 
phrasis is unavoidable. If we recognize, however, as 
the basis of this account the fact that experience has 
the character of recurrence, that is, comes to us in more 
or less uniform contexts, we have in this all that is 
required for the theory of signs and all that the old 
theory of causes was entitled to maintain. Some of 
these contexts are temporally and spatially closer 
than others: the contexts investigated by physics for 
instance narrow themselves down until differential 
equations are invoked; those which psychology has 
hitherto succeeded in detecting are wide, the uniformly 
linked events being often far apart in time. Interpreta 
tion, however, is only possible thanks to these recurrent 
contexts, a statement which is very generally admitted 

conventions It will be further noticed that Mr Russell's cansal account 
of meaning, especially pp 197 S and 231 S .differs fron that developed 
here in the importance assigned to images, meaning or reference being 
defined either through the similarity of images to what they mean 01 
through their ' causal efficacy,' the ' appropriateness ' of their effects 
The chief objections to this view are the obscnrity of ' appropriateness,' 
the variation of ' causal efficacy ' with identity of meaning, anil the 
complexities which result in connection with the problem of Truth 
Ftofessor Eaton in his Symbohsm and Truth (1925), p 23, adopts a view 
somewhat similar to that of Mr Russell " 'The simplest solution for 
the purposes of the theory of knowledge is to accept as unique a meaning 
acdinfy Towards every object certain activities are appropriate " 

The contention of the present chapter, on the other hand, is that it is 
possible and profitable to go behind this ‘ appropnateness ' 

Mr Russell's less accessible exposition (The Dial, August, 1926, pp 
117-119) admits that images should not be introduced to explain meaning 



56 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

but which if examined will be found to be far more 
fundamental than has been supposed. To say, indeed, 
that anything- is an interpretation is to say that it is a 
member of a psychological context of a certain kind. 
An interpretation is itself a recurrence. 

A concrete illustration may be considered at this 
point. There is a well-known dog in most books upon 
animal behaviour which, on hearing the dinner-bell, 
runs, even from parts of the house quite out of reach of 
scents and savours, into the dining-room, so as to be 
well placed, should any kind thoughts towards him 
arise in the diners. Such a dog interprets the sound of 
the gong as a sign. How does this happen ? We shall 
all agree about the answer; that it is through the dog’s 
past experience. In this experience there have been so 
to speak recurrent clumps ctf events, and one such clump 
has been made up roughly as follows: Gong, savoury 
odour, longing contemplation of consumption of viands 
by diners, donations, gratification. Such a clump 
recurring from time to time we shall call an external 
context. Now on a particular occasion the gong is 
heard out of reach of savours. But thanks to past 
expenence of gong-sounds together with savours in 
the mterpretative dog, this present gong-sound gets into 
a peculiar relation to past gongs and savours, longings, 
etc., so that he acts in the sagacious manner described, 
and is in evidence at the meal. Now this set of mental 
events—his present hearing of the gong, his past 
hearings of similar sounds, his past savourings together 
with gongs, etc., and also his present mental process 
owing to which he runs into the dining-room—such 
a set we shall call psychological context. A context of 
this sort may plainly recur as regards its more general 
features. It is also clear that the members of it may 
be indefinitely numerous and may be widely separated 
in time, and that it is through this separateness in time 
that such a psychological context is able to link together 
external contexts, the recurrent clumps of experiences 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


57 


of the gongf-savour kind above mentioned. In a similar 
fashion all learning by experience will illustrate the 
point that to be an act of interpretation is merely to be 
a peculiar^ member of a psychological context of a 
certain kind ; a psychological context being a recurrent 
set of mental events peculiarly related to one another 
so as to recur, as regards their main features, with partial 
uniformity. 

Little hesitation will be felt in granting that with 
out such recurrence or partial uniformity no prediction, 
no inference, no recognition, no inductive generalization, 
no knowledge or probable opinion as to what is not 
immediately given, would be possible. What is more 
difficult to realize is that this is so only because 
these processes, recognitions, inferences or thinkings are 
members of certain recurrent psychological contexts. 
To say that I recognize something before me as a 
strawberry and expect it to be luscious, is to say that 
a present process in me belongs to a determinative 
psychological context together with certain past pro 
cesses (past perceptions and consumptions of straw 
berries). These psychological contexts recur whenever 
we recognize or infer. Usually they link up with (or 
form wider contexts with) external * contexts in a peculiar 
fashion.* When they do not, we are said to have been 
mistaken. 

The simplest terminology in which this kind of 
linkage can be stated is that of signs. Behind all 
interpretation we have the fact that when part of an 
external context recurs in experience this part is, through 
its linkage with a member of some psychological context 
(*.«., of a causally connected group of mental events often 
widely separated in time) sometimes a sign of the rest 
of the external context. 

Two points require elucidation if this outline is to 

^ A further analysis of the peculiarity appears in Appendix B 

* If we never discussed psychology ‘ external' might be read as 
' physical' 

* Cf p 62 tnfra, and Appendix B 



58 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

be filled in. The first concerns Contexts ; * the second 
the sense in which they are Uniform. 

{l) A context is a set of entities [things or events') related 
in a certain way ; these entities have each a character such 
that other sets of entities occur having the same characters 
and related by the same relation; and these occur 'nearly 
uniformly' In our instance of the match-scrape event 
and the flame event the uniting relation evidently in 
cludes proximity in time and space—a scrape in America 
and a flame in China would not constitute such a 
context—but it is important to realize that no restriction 
need be initially imposed as to the kind of relation which 
may occur as the uniting relation in a context, since 
which relations actually occur will be discovered only 
by experience. Contexts, moreover, may have any 
number of members ; dual contexts containing only two 
members seem to be rare, though for purposes of 
exposition it is convenient to suppose them to occur. 
The constitutive characters involved present a certain 
difficulty. In our instance of the match-scrape event 
and the flame event they may be written ‘ being a 
scrape’ and ‘being a flame,’ but these are plainly 
shorthand names for very elaborate sets of properties. 
It is not all scrapes from which we expect flames, 
and we would be surprised if our match flamed like 
magnesium ribbon. 

* Throughout the present volume the term context is used in the 
stnctly technical sense defined below, which difiers from the ordinary 
use A literary context is a group of words, incidents, ideas, etd , 
which on a given occasion accompanies or surrounds whatever is said 
to h;^ve the context, whereas a determinative context is a group of this 
kind which both recurs and is such that one at least of its members 
IS determined, given the others A somewhat similar but vaguer use 
^pears to have been adopted by Professor Baldwin (Thought and 
Things, Vol I, p 48), though it becomes cleru: as his exposition pro 
ceeds (cf also Appendix D) that the resemblance is illusory, since, 
e f , an image (Vol I, p 81) can be “ convertible into a context," and 
we read of " the development within a content itself of the enlarged 
context of predicated and implicated meamngs " (Vol II., p 246) 
Such nses onve more in common with that of Professor Titchener, 
who after the second passage which we quote in C]^pter VIII, says, 
“ I understand by context simply the mental process or complex of 
mental processes which accrues to the original idea throngh the sitaation 
in which the organism finds itself " 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


59 


(2) The difficulty here suggested in choosing con 
stitutive characters is connected with the problem ‘In 
what sense do contexts occur nearly umformly?' It is 
plain that if sufficiently general characters are taken 
and sufficiently general uniting relations, contexts not 
‘ nearly ’ but perfectly uniform can easily be found. 
For instance, the context constituted by two entities 
having each the character of ‘being an event’ and 
related by the relation of ‘succession.’^ On the other 
hand if we make the constitutive characters and uniting 
relation too specific, recurrence becomes uncertain. For 
this reason our account has to be in terms of probability. 
In our instance, to say that the context of which ‘scrape’ 
and ‘ flame ’ are constitutive characters recurs (or is a 
context) is to say:— 

either t'asX. whenever there is a scrape there will probably 
be a flame having the required relation to the 
scrape ; 

or that whenever there is a flame there was probably 
a scrape having the converse relation to the flame ; 

or both these statements. 

In the first case the context is said to be determina 
tive in respect of the character flame; in the second in 
respect of the character scrape; in the third in respect 
of both characters. 

A dual context is here taken for the sake of simplicity, 
a fact which tends to make the account appear artificial. 
Multiple contexts of three or more terms involve no 
further problems. They must be determinative in 
respect of one constitutive character, and may be so in 
respect of any number. 

In this account we have carefully avoided all mention 

^ It shoi’Id be noted that it is not necessary for the characters in 
respect of wiuch a sign is interpreted to be ‘ given,' 1 e , for us to know 
that they belong to it This circumstance is of importance in consider 
ing the processes of interpretation by which we arrive at knowledge 
of other entities than sensations It should be further observed that 
a constitutive character may be of the form ' being either A or B 
or C, etc ’ 



6 o THE MEANING OF MEANING 

of images—those revivals or copies of sensory experi 
ence which figure so prominently in most accounts of 
thinking. There are good reasons why attempts to 
build a theory of interpretation upon images must be 
hazardous. One of these is the grave doubt whether 
in some minds they ever occur or ever have occurred. 
Another is that in very many interpretations where 
words play no recognizable part, introspection, unless 
excessively subtle and therefore of doubtful value as 
evidence, fails to show that imagery is present. A third 
and stronger reason is that images seem to a great 
extent to be mental luxuries. Before the appearance 
of an image, say, of an afanc, something can be observed 
to occur which is often misleadingly described as ‘ an 
intention of imagining’ an afanc. But that this is not 
merely an intention becomes plain upon reflection. 
When we speak of an intention in this way we are 
speaking of affective-vohtional characters, those, roughly 
speaking, on account of which a state of mind changes 
from a relatively inchoate to a relatively organized and 
articulate condition. An intention by itself is as im 
possible as an excitement. There has to be something 
which is excited, and there has to be something for 
the intention to belong to. Now what is this in such 
cases as we are examining? 

Whatever it is it has that peculiar character of being 
directed towards one thmg rather than another, which 
we here call reference. This reference may be uncertain 
and vague, but seems to be the same in kind as that 
which occurs in more articulate and clear-cut cases of 
thinking, where symbols in the form of images or words 
have been provided. In the initial stages of such 
references it is hard to suppose that images are playing 
any essential part. Any image which does arise is at 
once accepted or rejected as it accords or disaccords 
with the reference, and this accordance is not a question 
of matching between images or of similarity in any 
intrinsic characters. If images of any sort are involved 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 6i 

in these states of beginning to think of things, it is 
certain that they are not always involved qua images, 
i.e., as copying or representing the things to which 
the reference points, but in a looser capacity as mere 
signs and not in their capacity as mimetic or simulative 
signs. 

Indeed, it may be questioned whether mimetic 
imagery is not really a late, sporadic product in mental 
development. We are so accustomed to beginning 
psychology with images that we tend to think that 
minds must have begun with them too. But there is 
no good reason to suppose that the mind could not 
work equally well without them. They have certain 
oddly limited uses as economizing effort in certain 
restricted fields The artist, the chess-player, the mathe 
matician find them convenient. But these are hardly 
primitive mental occupations. Hunger rarely excites 
taste images, the salivary flow occurs without them. 
Route-finding in pathless wilds or Metropolitan suburbs 
is best done by sense of direction and perception alone. 
On the whole, a mimetic sign is not the kind of thing 
that a primitive mind would be able to make much use 
of. Other signs would serve equally well for most 
purposes, and the few advantages of images would be 
more than counterbalanced by ' the risk of danger ’ to 
which theif users expose themselves. An inaccurate 
or irrelevant image is worse than no image at all. 
Such arguments as there are in favour of images as 
very primitive and fundamental products, the argument 
from dreams, for example, or the alleged prevalence of 
images among children and primitive peoples, are 
obviously difficult to estimate. Imagery may be 
prevalent without necessarily serving any important 
function; in day-dreaming, for instance, the gratifications 
which it affords are no proof that the references con 
cerned could not occur without it. Similarly those who 
naturally produce exhaustive images of their breakfast- 
table can often know all about it without a glimmer of 



62 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


an image, unless too much indulgence in images has 
impaired their natural ability. 

For these reasons, any theory of interpretation which 
can refrain from making images a corner-stone has clear 
advantages over those which cannot. It is mainly on 
this point that the view here developed differs from Mr 
Russell’s account* of meaning, which should, however, 
be consulted by those who desire a more simple dis 
cussion of the part played by Mnemonic causation in 
knowledge than our brief outline provides. 

Suppose now that we have struck our match and 
have expected a flame. We need some means of 
deciding whether our expectation has been true or false. 
Actually we look to see whether there was a flame or 
not, but the question we have to answer is, how do we 
pick out, amongst all the other possible events which 
we might have selected, this particular flame as the 
event on which the truth or falsity of our expectation 
depended.* We pick it out by means of certain external 
contexts to which it belongs: namely, it is that ev'ent, 
if any, which completes the context whose other member 
in this case is the scrape, and thus comes to be linked 
to the expectation through the psychological context 
made up of that expectation and past experiences of 
scrapes and flames. 

If now there be an event which completes the external 
context in question, the reference is true and the event 
is its referent. If there be no such event, the reference 
is fake, and the expectation is disappointed. 

The above account covers beliefs of the form ‘ a 
flame will follow this scrape’ prompted by a present 


^ See The Analysts of Mtnd, espeaally pp 207-210. One point in 
this treatment is of extreme importance " Genez^ity and par 
ticularity/' according to Mr Russell. " are a matter of degree " (p 209) 
For a causal theory of reference no other conclusion appears possible. 
Absolute particulars and absolute universals ought therefore to be out 
of court and beneath discussion 

‘ A more formal and elaborate account of this crucial step in the 
theory of inteipretation will be found in Appendix B, to which those 
who appreciate the complexity of the subject are directed 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


63 

sensation. Instead of a present sensation a belief may 
itself be a sign for a further belief which will then be 
an interpretation of this belief. The only cases of this 
which appear to occur are introspective beliefs of the 
form ‘ I believe that I am believing, etc.’ which may, 
it is important to recognize, be false as often as, or 
more often than, other beliefs. As a rule a belief not 
prompted by a sensation requires a number of beliefs 
simultaneous or successive for its signs. The beliefs, 
‘ There will be a flame ’ and ‘ I am in a powder factory,’ 
will, for most believers, be signs together interpreted 
by the belief ‘ The end is at hand.’ Such is one of 
the psychological contexts determinative in respect of 
the character of this last belief.^ Whether the belief 
in question is true or not will depend upon whether 
there is or is not some entity forming together with 
the referents of the two sign beliefs, in virtue of its 
characters and their characters and a multiple relation, 
a context determinative in respect of their characters. 
In other words—upon whether the place does blow up. 

In this way the account given can be extended to 
all cases of particular expectations. Further, since the 
uniting relations of contexts are not restricted to suc 
cessions It will also apply to all cases of inference or 
interpretation from particular to particular. The next 
step, therefore, is to inquire what kind of account can 
be given of general references. 

The abstract language which it is necessary to 
employ raises certain difficulties. In a later chapter 
arguments will be brought in favour of regarding such 
apparent symbols as ‘character,’ ‘relation,’ ‘property,’ 


^ The additional assumption required here is that the efiects of a 
behef are often similar, in respect of derivative belief, to the effects 
of the verifying sensation Few people will deny that the belief that 
an unseen man m a bush is shooting at me will have effects (in respect' 
of such derivative bebefs as that it would be better for me to be else 
where) sinuliu: to those which would be occasioned by the sight of the 
man so shootmg Such contexts, in which a belief in the occurrence 
of A and A's occurrence itself are alternative signs for interpretations 
the same m these respects, are as well estabbshed as any m psychology. 



64 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

‘concept,’ etc., as standing for nothing beyond (in 
directly) the individuals to which the alleged character 
would be applicable. The most important of these 
arguments is the natural incredibility of there being 
such universal denizens of a world of being. As we 
shall see, these apparent symbols are indispensable as 
machinery, and thus for some purposes such credulity 
is harmless. But for other purposes these baseless (or 
purely symbolically based) beliefs are dangerous im 
pediments. Thus a chief source of opposition to an 
extension of the account here outlined to general 
references, is phantom difficulties deriving from faith 
in this other world. 

Such references may be formulated in a variety 
of ways’—‘All S is P' and ' {x )‘are 
favourites. What we have to discover is what happens 
when we have a belief which can be symbolized in 
these ways. Let us take as an instance the belief 
‘ All match-scrapes are followed by flames.’ There is 
good reason to suppose that such beliefs are a later 
psychological development than beliefs of the form 
which we have been considering. It is plausible to 
suppose that some animals and infants have particular 
expectations but not any general beliefs. General behefs, 
it is said, arise by reflection upon particular beliefs. 
Thus we may expect to find that general beliefs arise 
in some way out of particular beliefs. But the gener 
ality and particularity to be attributed to simple or 
primordial references are certainly not those which 
logical formulation endeavours to introduce. Nor 
should it be supposed that genetically a stage or era 
of particular reference precedes general thinking. It 
is rather the case that in all thought processes two 
tendencies are present, one towards greater definiteness 
or precision, the other towards wider scope and range. 
It is the conditions under which this second tendency 
takes effect that we are here considering. 

Following this clue let us try to set down some of the 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


65 

conditions under which a general belief might develop 
from such particular references as we have been con 
sidering. To begin with we may suppose 

(1) that a number of true and verified interpreta 
tions of match-scrapes have occurred in the 
same organism, and 

(2) that no interpretation which has been shown 
to be felse, by the absence in the related 
sensation of the expected flame character, is 
concerned in the genesis of the general belief. 

The second of these conditions is plainly more 
important than the first. We often seem to pass to 
general beliefs from single experiences and not to 
require a plurality, but (exceptionally powerful thinkers 
apart) we do not base general beliefs upon directly 
contradictory evidence. We may therefore retain the 
second condition, but must revise the first. In some 
cases, no doubt, repeated verified expectations do 
condition the general expectation, but they condition 
its degree rather than its reference. On the other hand 
some experience of repetition would seem to be required. 
A primordial mind’s first thought could hardly be a 
general thought in the sense here considered. It seems 
justifiable to assume that some series of similar verified 
interpretations should be included in the context of a 
general belief, though how closely this need be con 
nected with the particular interpretation which is being 
generalized must at present be left uncertain. 

Another condition which can only be put rather 
vaguely concerns the inclusiveness of a general 
reference. The togetherness involved in such a refer 
ence does not seem to require any properties in a 
‘ mind ’ beyond those already assumed and stated, but 
the inclusiveness might be thought to raise an addi 
tional problem. The kind of experience required, 
however, is not difficult to discover. On many occasions 
so far as the verifying stimuli are concerned it is 



66 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

indifferent whether we think of all of a given set of 
objects or of each of them in turn. The child who finds 
ail his fingers sticky might equally well have found 
each of them sticky. On other occasions his smallest 
fingers will not need to be washed. Thus the difference 
between inclusive and non-inclusive sets of objects 
as referents, the difference between ‘some’ and ‘all’ 
references, will early develop appropriate signs. 
Individuals can be found who throughout their lives 
‘ think ’ of these differences by means of such images, 
t.e., use such images as adjunct-signs in their inter 
pretations. In other cases no such imagery nor even 
the use of the words ‘ all ’ or ‘ some,’ or any equivalents, 
is discoverable. Yet even in these cases some linger 
ing trace of the engraphic action due to situations of 
this sort may reasonably be supposed as conditioning 
interpretations which ‘employ these notions.’ In 
attempting therefore to set out the kind of psychological 
context of which a general reference consists, terms 
representing them would require inclusion. 

Such in very tentative outline is the account which 
the causal theory of reference would give of general 
beliefs. The detailed investigation of such contexts is 
a task to which sooner or later psychology must address 
itself, but the methods required are of a kind for which 
the science has only recently begun to seek. Much 
may be expected when the theory of the conditioned 
reflex, due to Pavlov, has been further developed.* 

It remains to discuss in what sense, if any, a false 
belief, particular or general, has a referent. From the 
definitions given it will be plain that the sense in which 
a false belief may be said to have a referent must be 
quite other than that in which a true belief has a 
referent. Thus the arguments now to be given for 
a more extended use of the term in no way affect what 
has been said ; and it will also be purely as a matter 

^ For an account of this method and its appUcations see op. nt , Tht 
Meaning of Psychology, Chapter IV 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 67 

of convenience that we shall use the term in connection 
with false beliefs. 

In the first place it is clear that true and false 
references alike agree in a respect in which processes 
such as sensing, breathing, contracting muscles, 
secreting, desiring, etc., do not agree with them. It 
is convenient to have a term, such as reference, to stand 
for this respect in which they agree. The term ‘ belief’ 
which might at first appear most suitable is less con 
venient, both because of its association with doctrines 
such as those above discussed which postulate an 
unique relation ‘ thinking of,’ and because it is becom 
ing more and more often used with special reference 
to the affective-volitional characters of the process. A 
second and stronger reason derives from what may be 
called the analysis of references. If we compare, say, 
the references symbolized by ‘ There will be a flash 
soon,’ and ‘There will be a noise soon,’ it is at least 
plausible to suppose that they are compounds contain 
ing some similar and some dissimilar parts. The 
parts symbolized by ‘ flash ’ and ‘ noise ’ we may 
suppose to be dissimilar, and the remaining parts to 
be similar in the two cases. The question then arises : 
“ What are these parts from which it would seem 
references can be compounded ? " 

The ansWer which we shall give will be that they 
are themselves references, that every compound 
reference is composed wholly of simple references 
united in such a way as will give the required structure 
to the compound reference they compose.. But in 
attempting to carry out this analysis a special difficulty 
has to be guarded against. We must not suppose that 
the structure of the symbol by which we symbolize the 
reference to be analysed does in any regular fashion 
reflect its structure. Thus in speaking of the parts 
symbolized by ‘ flash ’ and ‘ noise ’ above we are 
running a risk. Illegitimate analyses of symbols are 
the source of nearly all the difficulties in these subjects. 



68 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

Another point which must first be made clear con 
cerns the sense in whch references may be compounded. 
To speak of a reference is to speak of the contexts 
psychological and external by which a sign is linked to 
its referent. Thus a discussion of the compounding of 
references is a discussion of the relations of contexts 
to one another. 

What are usually called the ‘logical forms’ of 
propositions, and what we may call the forms of 
references, are, for the view here maintained, forms or 
structures of the determinative contexts of interpreta 
tions. They are at present approached by logicians 
mainly through the study of symbolic procedure. A 
more direct approach appears however to be possible, 
though, as yet, difficult. Thus the remaining portions 
of the complete contextual theory of reference, namely 
the accounts of references of the forms ‘ p or q,’ ‘ p and 
q,’ ‘not p,’ and of the difference between ‘all S’ and 
‘ some S,’ regarded as concerned with the interweaving 
of contexts, are, if still conjectural, plainly not beyond 
conjecture. 

With this proviso, we may resume the consideration 
of the referents of false and of the analysis of compound 
beliefs. 

We have seen that true and false beliefs are members 
of the same kinds of psychological contexts, and that 
they differ only in respect of external contexts.^ Let 

^ A complex of things as united in a context may be called a ' fact' 
There need be no harm in this, but as a rule the verbal ^bits thus 
incited overpower the sense of actuality even in the best philosophers 
Out of facts spring ‘ negative facts ’, ‘ that no flame occurs ’ becomes 
a negative fact with which our expectation fails to correspond when 
we are in error It is then natural to suppose that there are two modes 
of reference, towards a fact for a true reference, away from it for a false 
In this way the theory of reference can be made very complicated 
and difficult, as for instance by Mr Russell m his Analysts of Mtnd, 
pp As regards negative facts, Mr Russell has allowed his 

earlier theories to remain undisturbed by his recent study of Meaning. 
The general question of ' negative facts ’ is discussed in Appendix E , 
and we shall find, when we come to distinguish the various senses of 
meaning, that to raise the question of the correspondence of belief 
with fact IS lor a causal theory of reference to attempt to solve the 
problem twice over When fbe problem of reference is settled that of 
truth IS found to be solved as well 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


69 

us consider this difference again, taking for the sake 
of simplicity the case of particular beliefs. Suppose 
that of two possible beliefs, ‘ There will be something 
green here in a moment,’ ‘There will be something red 
here in a moment,' the first is true and the second false. 
But the second, if it can be regarded, as having 
contained or included the belief, ‘There will be some 
thing here in a moment,’ will have included a belief 
which is true and similar to a belief included in the 
first belief. Reverting now to our definition of a 
context let us see in what sense this belief is included 
and how it can be true. 

In such a case the external context may consist of 
two entities, say s (a sign) and ^ (something green), 
having the characters S, G, and related by space and 
time relations which may be taken together. But it is 
clear that both s and g will have other characters 
besides 5 and G. For instance, s has succeeded other 
entities and may be interpreted in respect of this 
character as well as in respect of 5 , so ^ interpreted it 
gives rise to the belief, ‘ There will be something here 
in a moment ’; interpreted also in the further respect 
of 5 'it gives rise to the complex belief, ‘There will be 
something green here in a moment,’ or to the complex 
belief, ‘ There^will be something red here in a moment,’ 
true and false interpretation of s in this further respect 
as the case may be. In either case, however, the 
contained belief, ‘ There will be something here in a 
moment,’ will be true if there is something (say g) 
w'hich forms with s, in virtue of r’s character of being a 
successor (or other temporal characters) and g’s tem 
poral characters, a context determinative of this 
character of s. Thanks to the generality of these 
characters such contexts never fail to recur, a fact which 
accounts for the ease with which true predictions of 
this unspecific kind can be made. 

^ Whether this is a sufficient character for the interpretation need 
not be considered in this brief outline of the theory 



70 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


It appears then that a belief may contain other less 
specific beliefs, and that a compound definite belief is 
composed of simpler, less specific beliefs, xmited by 
such relations as will yield the required structure.^ 

One objection to such a view derives from language. 
It is usual to restrict the term belief to such processes 
as are naturally symbolized by propositions and further 
to those among such processes as have certain affective- 
volitional characters in addition to their characters as 
cognitions. The simple references which would be 
required if the analysis suggested were adopted would 
rarely lend themselves to propositional formulation and 
would be lacking as a rule in accompanying belief, 
feelings and promptings to action. Thus the terms 
‘ idea ’ and ‘ conception ’ would often be more suitable 
for such processes. To extend a metaphor which is 
becoming familiar, these might be regarded as 
‘ electronic ’ references. But the ideas or conception 
with which we are here concerned would have to be 
clearly distinguished from the ‘ concepts ’ of those 
metaphysicians who believe in a world of universals. 
We shall deal at greater length with the question in 
Chapter V. 

Let us consider the idea or conception of green. 
It arises in the reader in this case thro[Ugh the occur 
rence of the word ‘green.’ On many occasions this 
word has been accompanied by presentations of green 
things. Thus the occurrence of the word causes in him 
a certain process which we may call the idea of green. 
But this process is not the idea of any one green thing ,* 
such an idea would be more complex and would require 
a sign (or symbol in this case) with further characters 
for him to interpret—only so will his idea be specific. 

^ The important and intncate problems raised, by these relations 
are to be approached in the same fashion as the problem of the generality 
of references, which is in fact an instance Xte great question ' What 
IS logical form ? ' left at present to logicians whc^ only method is the 
superstitious nte ‘ direct inspection,' must in time be made amenable 
to investigation 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


71 

The psychological context to which it belongs is not of 
a form to link any one green thing with the sign rather 
than any other. If now we write instead, ‘ a green 
thing,’ the same process occurs—unless the reader is a 
logician or philosopher with special theories (i.e., pecu 
liar linguistic contexts). In both cases the idea can 
be said to be ‘of’ any sensation similar to certain 
sensations which have accompanied in the past the 
occurrence of the sensation taken as a sign. Compare 
now the indefinite belief symbolized by ‘ There are 
green things.’ Here any one of the same set of 
sensations that the idea was said to be ‘ of ’ will verify 
the belief For if there be one or more entities similar 
to certain entities which are members of its psycho 
logical context, it will be true ; otherwise it will be 
false. We may therefore extend the term ‘ referent ’ to 
cover these entities, if there be any such, without the 
usage leading to confusion. 

It will be noticed that strictly simple indefinite 
beliefs (illustrated by, ‘ There are green things ’ as 
opposed to ‘There are green things now’) only require 
for their truth a condition which is present among 
their psychological contexts. This happy state of 
things has its parallel in the fact that strictly simple 
ideas raise no problem as to whether they are ideas 
‘of’ anything or not But complex ide^, such as 
glass mountains, phoenixes, round squares, and 
virtuous triangles may be made to bristle with such 
problems. The distinction between an idea and a belief 
is, however, one of degree, although through symbolic 
conventions it can sometimes appear insuperable. 

We can now define the usage of the term ‘ referent’ 
for false beliefs. All beliefs whether true or false are 
theoretically analysable into compounds whose con 
stituents are simple references, either definite or in 
definite, united by the relations which give its ‘ logical 
form ’ to the reference. 

Definite simple references are not very common. 



7Z THE MEANING OF MEANING 

Sometimes when we say ‘ this I ’ ‘ there ! ’ ‘ now I ’ we 
seem to have them. But usually, even when our refer 
ence is such that it can have but one referent, it can 
be analysed. Even references for which we use simple 
symbols (names), Dostoevski, are perhaps always 
compound, distinct contexts being involved severally 
determinative of distinct characters of the referent.* 
What is more important is to understand the peculiar 
dispersion which occurs in false reference. Illustrations 
perhaps make this clearer than do arguments. 

Thus, if we say, ‘ This is a book ’ and are in error, 
our reference will be composed of a simple indefinite 
reference to any book, another to anything now, another 
to anything which may be here, and so on. These 
constituents will all be true, but the whole reference to 
this book which they together make up (by cancelling 
out, as It were, all but the one referent which can be 
a book and here and now) will be false, if we are in 
error and what is there is actually a box or something 
which fails to complete the three contexts, book, here, 
and now. To take a slightly more intricate case, a 
golfer may exclaim, “Nicely over'” and it may be 
obvious to the onlooker that his reference is to a divot 
and Its flight, to his stroke, to a bunker, and to a ball. 
Yet the ball remains stationary, and these constituent 
or component references, each adequate In itself, are 
combined in his complex reference otherwise than are 
their separate referents in actual fact. There is clearly 
no case for a non-occurrent flight of a golf-ball as an 
object of his belief; though he may have been referring 
to the feel of his stroke, or to an image of a travelling 
ball. In these last cases we should have to suppose 
him to be shortening his own interpretative chain 
instead of breaking loose and venturing a step too far 

^ This sentence like all sentences containing words such as * character, * 
IS redundant and should rather read *' distinct contexts being 
involved severally, indefinitely, determinative of the referent ** But 
this pruning of its redundancies would lehd to failure in its coxnmuni' 
active function. Cf p. 96 tnfra 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


73 

by what may be called saltatory interpretation. His 
language (cf. also Canon IV., page 103 infra') does not 
bind us to either alternative. Thus we see in outline 
how compound false beliefs may be analysed. 

The referent of a compound false belief will be the 
set of the scattered referents of the true simple beliefs 
which it contains. We shall, in what follows, speak of 
beliefs, and interpretations, whether true or false, and 
of ideas, as references, implying that in the senses 
above dehned they have referents. 

We thus see how the contextual theory of reference 
can be extended to cover all beliefs, ideas, conceptions 
and ‘thinkings of.’ The details of its application to 
special cases remain to be worked out. Logicians will 
no doubt be able to propound many puzzles,' the 
solving of which will provide healthy exercise for 
psychologists The general hypothesis that thinking 
or reference is reducible to causal relations ought how 
ever to commend itself more and more to those who 
take up (at least sometimes) a scientific attitude to the 
world. Subject to the proviso that some satisfactory 
account of probability can be given, ‘ meaning ’ in the 
sense of reference becomes according to this theory a 
matter open to experimental methods. 

A satisfactory account of probability, however, 
though very desirable, does not seem likely to be 
forthcoming by current methods. Evidently a change 
of attack is required The late Lord Keynes’ Treatise 
starting as it does with an unanalysable logical relation, 
called probability, which holds between equally mysteri 
ous and unapproachable entities, called propositions, 
IS too mediaeval in its outlook to be fruitful, and it remains 
to be seen whether scientists will be able to profit by 
Reichenbach’s more empirical WahrschetnHchkeitslekre 

It seems possible on the contextual theory of refer- 

^ As, for instance, whether in the eicample talien above, if one or 
both of the sign be^efe were false, and yet the room we were in did 
blow up through other causes, our belief could be true ? This problem 
is easily solved if we noface that although the belief symbolized in the 
speaker would be false, a belief mated in a hearer might be true 



74 


THE MEANING OF MEANING 


ence to suggest an expansion of this kind of obscure 
shorthand and so come nearer the formulation of the 
yet undiscovered central question of probability. What 
are talked about by logicians as propositions are, 
according to this theory, relational characters of acts of 
referring—those relational characters for which the term 
‘ references ’ is used. Thus to believe, or entertain, or 
think of, a proposition, is on this view simply to refer, 
and the proposition as a separate entity is to be regarded 
as nothing but a linguistic fiction foisted upon us by 
the utraquistic subterfuge.* Two ‘ thinkings of’ the 
same * proposition ’ are two thinkings with the same 
reference, the same relational property, namely ‘ being 
contextually linked in the same way with the same 
referent.’ It will be noted that on this account of 
propositions the logical relations of propositions to one 
another must be dealt with far less summarily and 
formally than has hitherto been the case. 

With propositions so understood there occurs a sense 
in which a single proposition by itself without relation 
to other propositions, can intelligibly be said to be 
probable. Probability here has still a relational aspect, 
and it is only because propositions (t.e., references) are 
relational that they can be said to be probable. This 
very fundamental sense is that in which the uniformity 
of the context upon which the truth of a reference depends 
is probable. 

We have seen that by taking very general consti 
tutive characters and uniting relation, we obtain contexts 
of the highest probability. Similarly by taking too 
specific characters and relation the probability of the 
context dwindles until we should no longer call it a 
context. In this way, whether a context is probable 
can be seen to be a question about the degree of 
generality of its constitutive characters and uniting 
relation; about the number of its members, the other 
contexts to which they belong and so on ... a question 
> Cf Chapter VI., p. 134. 



SIGN-SITUATIONS 


75 

not about one featuie of the context but about many. 
We can always for instance raise the probability of 
a context by adding suitable members. But this last 
though a natural remark suffers from the linguistic 
redundance to which the difficulties of the problem are 
chiefly due. ‘ Probability ’ in the fundamental sense 
in which a context is probable is a shorthand symbol 
for all those of its features upon which the degree of 
its uniformity depends. 

In considering conscious and critical processes of 
interpretation we must not fail to realize that all such 
activity, e.g-., of the kind discussed in the theory of 
induction, rests upon ‘instinctive’ interpretations. If 
we recognize how essential ‘ instinctive ’ interpretation 
is throughout, we shall be able to pursue our investiga 
tions undisturbed by the doubts, of causal purists or 
the delay of the mathematicians in bringing their 
differential equations into action. For the working 
of a differential equation itself, that most rational 
process of interpretation, will break down unless many 
‘ instinctive ’ interpretations, which are not at present 
capable of any mathematical treatment, are successfully 
performed. 

It IS sometimes very easy by experimental methods 
to discover what a thought process is referring to. If 
for instance'we ask a subject to ‘think of’ magenta 
we shall, by showing various colours to him, as often 
as not find that he is thinking of some other colour. It 
is this kind of consideraton which makes the phrase 
‘ adapted to ’ so convenient an equivalent for ‘ referring 
to,’ and if we bear in mind that ‘being adapted to’ 
something is only a shorthand symbol for being linked 
with It in the manner described, through external and 
psychological contexts, we may be able to use the 
term without its purposive and biological associations 
leading to misunderstanding. 

We have still to give an account of misinterpreta 
tion, and to explain how unfounded beliefs can arise. To 



76 THE MEANING OF MEANING 

begin with the first, a person is often said to have 
introduced irrelevant, or to have omitted relevant, con 
siderations or notions when he has misinterpreted some 
sign. The notion of relevance is of great importance 
in the theory of meaning. A consideration (notion, 
idea) or an experience, we shall say, is relevant to an 
interpretation when it forms part of the psychological 
context which links other contexts together in the 
peculiar fashion in which interpretation so links them.* 
An irrelevant consideration is a non-linking member of 
a psychological context. The fact that ‘ baseless ’ 
convictions occur might be thought to be an objection 
to the view of thinking here maintained The explana 
tion is however to be found in the fact that mental 
processes are not determined purely psychologically 
but, for example, by blood pressure also. If our in 
terpretation depended only upon purely psychological 
contexts it might be that we should always be justified 
in our beliefs, true or false. We misinterpret typically 
when we are asleep or tired. Misinterpretaton there 
fore is due to interference with psychological contexts, 
to ‘ mistakes.’ Whether an interpretation is true or 
false on the other hand does not depend only upon 
psychological contexts—unless we are discussing psy 
chology. We may have had every reason to expect 
a flame when we struck our match, but this, alas I will 
not have made the flame certain to occur. That depends 
upon a physical not a psychological context. 

^ Other psychological linkings of external contexts are not essentially 
different from interpretation, but we are only here concerned with 
the cogmtive aspect of mental process The same sense of relevance 
would be appropriate in discussing conation The context metiiod of 
analysis is capable of throwing much light upon the problems of desire 
and motive 
